# Lab #2 –mdadmLinear Device (Basic Functionality) 

 CMPSC311 Introduction to Systems Programming Spring 2022 Prof. Sencun Zhu and Prof. Suman Saha Checkpoint: February 18, 2022 (11:59 PM) EST Due date: February 25, 2022 (11:59 PM) EST 

Like all lab assignments in this class, you are prohibited from copying any content from the Internet or discussing, sharing ideas, code, configuration, text, or anything else or getting help from anyone in or outside of the class. Consulting online sources is acceptable, but under no circumstances should anything be copied. Failure to abide by this requirement will result in penalty as described in our course syllabus. 

Checkpoint 1: You should pass the first three tests, testmountunmount(), testreadbeforemount(), and testreadinvalidparameters(), by February 18, 11:59 PM EST. Otherwise you will get 30% penalty even if you pass all tests by the due date. You will need to installlibssl-devby runningsudo apt install libssl-dev. 

Today is the first day of your summer internship at a cryptocurrency startup. Before you join, the marketing team decided that they want to differentiate their product by emphasizing on security. On the same day that you join the company, the shipment of 16 military-grade, nuclear bomb-proof hard disks arrives. They are supposed to replace the existing commercial-grade hard disks and will be used to store the most critical user data—cryptocurrency wallets. However, the disk company focuses on physical security and doesn’t invest much in software. They provide their disks as a JBOD (Just a Bunch of Disks), which is a storage architecture consisting of numerous disks inside of a single storage enclosure. They also provide a user manual along with the shipment: 

 Bits Width Field Description 26-31 6 Command This is the command to be executed by JBOD. 22-25 4 DiskID This is the ID of the disk to perform operation on 8-21 14 Reserved Unused bits (for now) 0-7 8 BlockID Block address within the disk 

 Table 1: JBOD operation format 

Thank you for purchasing our military-grade, nuclear bomb-proof hard disks, built with patented NASA technologies. Each of the disks in front of you consists of 256 blocks, and each block has 256 bytes, coming to a total of 256×256 = 65,536 bytes per disk. Since you bought 16 disks, the combined capacity is 16× 65,536 = 1,048,576 bytes = 1 MB. We provide you with a device driver with a single function that you can use to control the disks. 

 int jbod_operation(uint32_t op, uint8_t *block); 

This function returns 0 on success and -1 on failure. It accepts an operation through theopparameter, the format of which is described in Table 1, and a pointer to a buffer. The command field can be one of the following commands, which are declared as a Cenumtype in the header that we have provide to you: 

1. JBOD_MOUNT: mount all disks in the JBOD and make them ready to serve commands. This is the first     command that should be called on the JBOD before issuing any other commands; all commands before     it will fail. When the command field ofopis set to this command, all other fields inopare ignored by     the JBOD driver. Similarly, theblockargument passed tojbod_operationcan be NULL. 

---

2. JBOD_UNMOUNT: unmount all disks in the JBOD. This is the last command that should be called on     the JBOD; all commands after it will fail. When the command field ofopis set to this command, all     other fields inopare ignored by the JBOD driver. Similarly, theblockargument passed tojbod_-     operationcan be NULL. 

3. JBOD_SEEK_TO_DISK: seeks to a specific disk. JBOD internally maintains anI/O position, a tuple     consisting of{CurrentDiskID,CurrentBlockID}, which determines where the next I/O operation will     happen. This command seeks to the beginning of disk specified by DiskID field inop. In other words, it     modifies I/O position: it sets CurrentDiskID to DiskID specified inopand it sets CurrentBlockID to 0.     When the command field ofopis set to this command, the BlockID field inopis ignored by the JBOD     driver. Similarly, theblockargument passed tojbod_operationcan be NULL. 

4. JBOD_SEEK_TO_BLOCK: seeks to a specific block in current disk. This command sets the Current-     BlockID inI/O positionto the block specified in BlockID field inop. When the command field ofop     is set to this command, the DiskID field inopis ignored by the JBOD driver. Similarly, theblock     argument passed tojbod_operationcan be NULL. 

5. JBOD_READ_BLOCK: reads the block in current I/O position into the buffer specified by theblock     argument tojbod_operation. The buffer pointed byblockmust be of block size, that is 256 bytes.     More importantly, after this operation completes, the CurrentBlockID in I/O position is incre-     mented by 1; that is, the next I/O operation will happen on the next block of the current disk.     When the command field ofopis set to this command, all other fields inopare ignored by the JBOD     driver. 

6. JBOD_WRITE_BLOCK: writes the data in theblockbuffer into the block in the current I/O position.     The buffer pointed byblockmust be of block size, that is 256 bytes. More importantly, after this     operation completes, the CurrentBlockID in I/O position is incremented by 1; that is, the next I/O     operation will happen on the next block of the current disk.When the command field ofopis set to     this command, all other fields inopare ignored by the JBOD driver. 

After you finished your onboarding session with HR and enjoyed the free lunch with your new colleagues, you received the following email from the manager of the team. 

---

 Welcome, to the team! Here’s your task for the next two weeks. You will be working on integrating JBOD into our existing storage system. Specifically, you will implement one of the functionalities of themdadmutility in Linux.Mdadmstands for multiple disk and device administration, and it is a tool for doing cool tricks with multiple disks. You will implement one of such tricks supported bymdadm, calledlinear device. A linear device makes multiple disks appear as a one large disk to the operating system. In our case, we will use your program to configure 16 disks of size 64 KB as a single 1 MB disk. Below are the functions you need to implement. 

 int mdadm_mount(void): Mount the linear device; nowmdadmuser can run read and operations on the linear address space that combines all disks. It should return 1 on success and -1 on failure. Calling this function the second time without callingmdadm_unmountin between, should fail. 

 int mdadm_unmount(void): Unmount the linear device; now all commands to the linear device should fail. It should return 1 on success and -1 on failure. Calling this function the second time without callingmdadm_mountin between, should fail. 

 int mdadm_read(uint32_t addr, uint32_t len, uint8_t *buf): Read len bytes intobufstarting ataddr. Read from an out-of-bound linear address should fail. A read larger than 1,024 bytes should fail; in other words,lencan be 1,024 at most. There are a few more restrictions that you will find out as you try to pass the tests. 

 Good luck with your task! 

Now you are all pumped up and ready to make an impact in the new company. You spend the afternoon with your mentor, who goes through the directory structure and the development procedure with you: 

1. jbod.h: The interface of JBOD. You will use the constants defined here in your implementation. 

2. jbod.o: The object file containing the JBOD driver. 

3. mdadm.h: A header file that lists the functions you should implement. 

4. mdadm.c: Your implementation of mdadm functions. 

5. tester.h: Tester header file. 

6. tester.c: Unit tests for the functions that you will implement. This file will compile into an exe-     cutable,tester, which you will run to see if you pass the unit tests. 

7. util.h: Utility functions used by JBOD implementation and the tester. 

8. util.c: Implementation of utility functions. 

9. Makefile: instructions for compiling and buildingtesterused by themakeutility. 

You workflow will consist of (1) implementing functions by modifyingmdadm.c, (2) typingmaketo build thetester, and (3) runningtesterto see if you pass the unit tests, and repeating these three steps until you pass all the tests. Although you only need to editmdadm.cfor successfully completing the assignment, you can modify any file you want if it helps you in some way. When testing your submission, however,we will use the original forms of all files except **mdadm.c** and **mdadm.h** .Remember that you are free to create helper functions if that helps you in mdadm.c (e.g., if you want to have a helper function to determine which block 

---

and disk correspond to a specific linear address). 

 Grading rubricThe grading would be done according to the following rubric: 

- Passing test cases 85% 

- Adding meaningful descriptive comments 5% 

- Successful “make” and execution without error 5% 

- Submission of commit id 5% 

Penalties:10% per day for late submission (up to 3 days). The lab assignment will not be graded if it is more than 3 days late. 30% penalty if first checkpoint is not passed by Feb 18th 2022, 11:59 pm (No late submission for the checkpoint). 

