# Lecture 9 

# CMPEN  331 

---

### Jump  Addressing 

- Jump  (j and  jal)  targets  could  be  anywhere  in  text     segment 

- Encode  full  address  in  instruction 

 op address 6  bits 26  bits 

---

### Branch  Addressing 

- Branch  instructions  specify 

- Opcode,  two  registers,  target  address 

- Most  branch  targets  are  near  branch 

- Forward  or  backward 

 op rs rt constant  or  address 6  bits 5  bits 5  bits 16  bits 

### n PC  (program  counter)-­relative  addressing 

#### n Target  address  =  PC  +  branch  address 

---

### Target  Addressing  Example 

- Loop  code  from  earlier  example 

- Assume  Loop  at  location  80000 

Loop: sll $t1, $s3, 2 80000 0 0 19 9 2 0 

 add $t1, $t1, $s6 80004 0 9 22 9 0 32 lw $t0, 0($t1) 80008 35 9 8 0 bne $t0, $s5, Exit 80012 5 8 21 2 addi $s3, $s3, 1 80016 8 19 19 1 j Loop 80020 2 20000 

Exit: ... 80024 

---

### Branching  Far  Away 

- If  branch  target  is  too  far  to  encode  with  16-­bit  offset,     assembler  rewrites  the  code 

- Example 

 beq $s0,$s1, L1 ↓ bne $s0,$s1, L2 j L1 L2: ... 

---

### Addressing  Modes 

- Addressing  modes  are  the  ways  of  specifying  an     operand  or  a  memory  address. 

- It  is  how  an  address  (memory  or  register)  is     determined. 

- Instruction  type  is  how  the  instruction  is  put  together. 

- Example:  addi,  beq,  and  lw are  all  I-­types     instructions. 

- addiuses  immediate  addressing  mode 

- beq uses  pc-­relative  addressing 

- lw uses  base  addressing 

---

### Addressing  Modes 

- **IMMEDIATE:** a  numeric  value  embedded  in  the  instruction  is  the     actual  operand. 

- **REGISTER:** a  source  or  destination  operand  is  specified  as  content     of  one  of  the  registers _$0-­$31._ This  is  used  in  the **jr** (jump  register)     instruction 

- **PC-­RELATIVE:** a  data  or  instruction  memory  location  is  specified     as  an  offset  relative  to  the  incremented  PC.  This  is  used  in  the **beq**     and **bne** (branch  equal,  branch  not  equal)  instructions. 

- **BASE:** a  data  or  instruction  memory  location  is  specified  as     assigned  offset  from  a  register.  This  is  used  in  the **lw** and **sw** (load     word,  store  word)  instructions. 

- **PSEUDO-­DIRECT:** the  memory  address  is(mostly)  embedded  in     the  instruction.  This  is  used  in  the **j** (jump)  instruction. 

---

### Addressing  Modes 

- Register  addressing     Operand  is  in  register     add  $s1,  $s2,  $s3  means  $s1  ←  $s2  +  $s3 

- Base  addressing     Operand  is  in  memory.     The  address  is  the  sum  of  a  register  and  a  constant.     lw$s1,  32($s3)  means  $s1  ←M[s3  +  32] 

- Immediate  addressing     The  operand  is  a  constant.     addi$s1,  $zero,  7  means  $s1  ← 0 + 7 

- PC-­relative  addressing     The  operand  address  =  PC  +  an  offset     Implements  position-­independent  codes. 

- Pseudo-­direct  addressing     Used  in  the  J  format.  The  target  address  is  the  concatenation  of  the  4  MSB’s  of  the  PC     with  the  28-­bit  offset.  This  is  a  minor  variation  of  the  PC-­relative  addressing  format. 

---

### Addressing  Mode  Summary 

---

# Lecture  10 

# CMPEN  331 

---

### C  Swap  Example 

- Illustrates  use  of  assembly  instructions  for  a  C  bubble     sort  function 

- Swap  procedure  (leaf)     void swap(int v[], int k)     {        int temp;        temp = v[k];        v[k] = v[k+1];        v[k+1] = temp;     } 

- v  in  $a0,  k  in  $a1,  temp  in  $t0 

 §2.13  A  C  Sort  Example  to  Put  It  All  Together 

---

### The  Procedure  Swap 

swap: sll $t1, $a1, 2 # $t1 = k * 4 add $t1, $a0, $t1 # (address of v[k]) lw $t0, 0($t1) # $t0 (temp) = v[k] lw $t2, 4($t1) # $t2 = v[k+1] sw $t2, 0($t1) # v[k] = $t2 (v[k+1]) sw $t0, 4($t1) # v[k+1] = $t0 (temp) jr $ra # return to calling routine 

---

## Assembler  Pseudoinstructions 

- Most  assembler  instructions  represent  machine     instructions  one-­to-­one 

- Pseudoinstructions: 

#### move $t0, $t1 → add $t0, $zero, $t1 

#### blt $t0, $t1, L → slt $at, $t0, $t1 

 bne $at, $zero, L 

- $at  (register  1):  assembler  temporary 

---

### Arrays  vs.  Pointers 

- Array  indexing  involves 

- Multiplying  index  by  element  size 

- Adding  to  array  base  address 

- Pointers  correspond  directly  to  memory  addresses 

- Can  avoid  indexing  complexity 

---

### Example:  Clearing  and  Array 

clear1(int array[], int size) { int i; for (i = 0; i < size; i += 1) array[i] = 0; } 

clear2(int *array, int size) { int *p; for (p = &array[0]; p < &array[size]; p = p + 1) *p = 0; } move $t0,$zero # i = 0 loop1: sll $t1,$t0,2 # $t1 = i * 4 add $t2,$a0,$t1 # $t2 = # &array[i] sw $zero, 0($t2) # array[i] = 0 addi $t0,$t0,1 # i = i + 1 slt $t3,$t0,$a1 # $t3 = # (i < size) bne $t3,$zero,loop1 # if (...) # goto loop1 

 move $t0,$a0 # p = & array[0] sll $t1,$a1,2 # $t1 = size * 4 add $t2,$a0,$t1 # $t2 = # &array[size] loop2: sw $zero,0($t0) # Memory[p] = 0 addi $t0,$t0, 4 # p = p + 4 slt $t3,$t0,$t2 # $t3 = #(p<&array[size]) bne $t3,$zero,loop2 # if (...) # goto loop2 

---

### What  is  a  pointer 

- In  a  generic  sense,  a  “pointer”  is  anything  that  tells  us     where  something  can  be  found. 

- When  declaring  a  variable,  the  compiler  sets  aside     memory  storage  with  a  unique  address to  store  that     variable. 

- The  compiler  associates  that  address  with  the     variable’s  name. 

- We  can  manipulate  the  memory  address  by  using     pointers which  means  that  we  create  a  second     variable  for  storing  the  memory  address. 

---

### Pointers 

§ Let  store  the  nRate's memory  address,  in  pTonRate variable. § So,  pTonRate now  holds  the  nRate's memory  address,  where the  actual  data  (10)  is  stored. § Pointer  variable  declaration  becomes  something  like  this, int *pTonRate; § The  asterisk  (*)  is  used  to  show  that  is  it  the  pointer  variable instead  of  normal  variable. 

Chapter  2  —Instructions:  Language  of  the  Computer  — 17 ,  © 

---

### Pointers 

§ A  variable  name _directly_ references  a  value. 

§ A  pointer _indirectly_ references  a  value.  Referencing  a  value  through  a pointer  is  called _indirection_. 

§ A  pointer  variable  must  be  declared  before  it  can  be  used. § C  uses  two  pointer  operators, 

1. Indirection  operator  (*)– asterisk  symbol,  has  been  explained     previously. 

2. Address-­of-­operator  (&)–ampersand  symbol,  means  return  the     address  of... 

§ When  & operator  is  placed  before  the  name  of  a  variable,  it  will  returns the  memory  address  of  the  variable  instead  of  stored  value. 

Chapter  2  —Instructions:  Language  of  the  Computer  — 18 ,  © 

---

### Pointers 

int x = 1, y = 2, z[10]; int *ip; /* ip is a pointer to an int */ 

ip = &x; /* ip points to (contains the memory address of) x */ 

- & "address  operator"  which  gives  or  produces  the  memory  address  of  a     data  variable 

- * "dereferencing  operator"  which  provides  the  contents  in  the  memory     location  specified  by  a  pointer 

- The  * operator  is  a  complement  of  &operator. 

Chapter  2  —Instructions:  Language  of  the  Computer  — 19 ,  © 

---

### Pointers 

 int * pToInt; pToInt = &nLocation; nLocation = 100; 

Chapter  2  —Instructions:  Language  of  the  Computer  — 20 ,  © 

---

### Example:  Clearing  and  Array 

clear1(int array[], int size) { int i; for (i = 0; i < size; i += 1) array[i] = 0; } 

clear2(int *array, int size) { int *p; for (p = &array[0]; p < &array[size]; p = p + 1) *p = 0; } move $t0,$zero # i = 0 loop1: sll $t1,$t0,2 # $t1 = i * 4 add $t2,$a0,$t1 # $t2 = # &array[i] sw $zero, 0($t2) # array[i] = 0 addi $t0,$t0,1 # i = i + 1 slt $t3,$t0,$a1 # $t3 = # (i < size) bne $t3,$zero,loop1 # if (...) # goto loop1 

 move $t0,$a0 # p = & array[0] sll $t1,$a1,2 # $t1 = size * 4 add $t2,$a0,$t1 # $t2 = # &array[size] loop2: sw $zero,0($t0) # Memory[p] = 0 addi $t0,$t0, 4 # p = p + 4 slt $t3,$t0,$t2 # $t3 = #(p<&array[size]) bne $t3,$zero,loop2 # if (...) # goto loop2 

---

### Comparison  of  Array  vs.  Ptr 

- Array  version  requires  shift  to  be  inside  loop 

- Part  of  index  calculation  for  incremented  I 

- incrementing  pointer 

- Compiler  can  achieve  same  effect  as  manual  use  of     pointers 

- Induction  variable  elimination  (eliminating  array     address  calculations  within  loops) 

- Better  to  make  program  clearer  and  safer 

---

### Translation  and  Startup 

 Many  compilers produce  object modules  directly 

 Static linking 

 §2.12  Translating  and  Starting  a  Program 

---

### Producing  an  Object  Module 

- Assembler  (or  compiler)  translates  program  into 

#### machine  instructions 

- Provides  information  for  building  a  complete 

#### program  from  the  pieces 

- Header:  described  contents  of  object  module 

- Text  segment:  translated  instructions 

- Static  data  segment:  data  allocated  for  the  life  of  the     program 

- Relocation  info:  for  contents  that  depend  on  absolute     location  of  loaded  program 

- Symbol  table:  global  definitions 

- Debug  info: for  associating  with  source  code 

---

### Linking  Object  Modules 

- Produces  an  executable  image 

1. Merges  segments 

2. Resolve  labels  (determine  their  addresses) 

3. Patch  location-­dependent  and  external  refs 

---

### Loading  a  Program 

- Load  from  image  file  on  disk  into  memory 

 1.Read  header  to  determine  segment  sizes 2.Create  virtual  address  space 3.Copy  text  and  initialized  data  into  memory 

- Or  set  page  table  entries  so  they  can  be  faulted  in 4.Set  up  arguments  on  stack 5.Initialize  registers  (including  $sp,  $fp,  $gp) 6.Jump  to  startup  routine 

- Copies  arguments  to  $a0,  ...  and  calls  main 

- When  main  returns,  do  exit  system  call 

---

### Dynamic  Linking 

- Only  link/load  library  procedure  when  it  is  called 

- Requires  procedure  code  to  be  relocatable 

- Avoids  image  bloat  caused  by  static  linking  of  all     (transitively)  referenced  libraries 

- Automatically  picks  up  new  library  versions 

---

### Lazy  Linkage 

Indirection  table 

Stub:  Loads  routine  ID, Jump  to  linker/loader 

Linker/loader  code 

Dynamically mapped  code 

---

### ARM  &  MIPS  Similarities 

- ARM:  the  most  popular  embedded  core 

- Similar  basic  set  of  instructions  to  MIPS 

 §2.16  Real  Stuff:  ARM  Instructions 

 ARM MIPS Date  announced 1985 1985 Instruction  size 32  bits 32  bits Address  space 32 -­bit  flat 32 -­bit  flat Data  alignment Aligned Aligned Data  addressing  modes 9 3 Registers 15 × 32 -­bit 32 × 32 -­bit Input/output Memory mapped 

 Memory mapped 

---

### Instruction  Encoding 

---

### The  Intel  x86  ISA 

- Evolution  with  backward  compatibility 

- 8080  (1974):  8-­bit  microprocessor 

- Accumulator,  plus  3  index-­register  pairs 

- 8086  (1978):  16-­bit  extension  to  8080 

- Complex  instruction  set  (CISC) 

- 8087  (1980):  floating-­point  coprocessor 

- Adds  FP  instructions  and  register  stack 

- 80286  (1982):  24-­bit  addresses 

- Segmented  memory  mapping  and  protection 

- 80386  (1985):  32-­bit  extension  (now  IA-­32) 

- Additional  addressing  modes  and  operations 

- Paged  memory  mapping  as  well  as  segments 

 §2.17  Real  Stuff:  x86  Instructions 

---

### The  Intel  x86  ISA 

- Further  evolution... 

- i486  (1989):  pipelined,  on-­chip  caches  and  FPU 

- Compatible  competitors:  AMD,  Cyrix,  ... 

- Pentium  (1993):  superscalar,  64-­bit  datapath 

- Later  versions  added  MMX  (Multi-­Media  eXtension)     instructions 

- The  infamous  FDIV  bug 

- Pentium  Pro  (1995),  Pentium  II  (1997) 

- New  microarchitecture  (see  Colwell, _The  Pentium_     _Chronicles_ ) 

- Pentium  III  (1999) 

- Added  SSE  (Streaming  SIMD  Extensions)  and     associated  registers 

- Pentium  4  (2001) 

- New  microarchitecture 

- Added  SSE2  instructions 

---

### The  Intel  x86  ISA 

- And  further... 

- AMD64  (2003):  extended  architecture  to  64  bits 

- EM64T  – Extended  Memory  64  Technology     (2004) 

- AMD64  adopted  by  Intel  (with  refinements) 

- Added  SSE3  instructions 

- Intel  Core  (2006) 

- Added  SSE4  instructions,  virtual  machine  support 

- AMD64  (announced  2007):  SSE5  instructions 

- Intel  declined  to  follow,  instead... 

- Advanced  Vector  Extension  (announced  2008) 

- Longer  SSE  registers,  more  instructions 

- If  Intel  didn’t  extend  with  compatibility,  its 

#### competitors  would! 

---

### Basic  x86  Registers 

---

### x86  Instruction  Encoding 

- Variable  length  encoding 

- Postfix  bytes  specify     addressing  mode 

- Prefix  bytes  modify     operation 

- Operand  length,  repetition,     locking,  ... 

---

### x86  Typical  Operation 

---

# Chapter  3 

## Arithmetic  for  Computers 

Assembly  Language  for  Intel-­Based  Computers  5/e,  2007.^37 

---

Chapter  3  —Arithmetic  for  Computers  — 38 

### Arithmetic  for  Computers 

- Operations  on  integers 

- Addition  and  subtraction 

- Multiplication  and  division 

- Dealing  with  overflow 

- Floating-­point  real  numbers 

- Representation  and  operations 

 §3.1  Introduction 

---

Chapter  3  —Arithmetic  for  Computers  — 39 

### Integer  Addition 

- Example:  7  +  6 

 §3.2  Addition  and  Subtraction 

#### n Overflow  if  result  out  of  range 

 n Adding  +ve and  –ve operands,  no  overflow n Adding  two  +ve operands n Overflow  if  result  sign  is  1 n Adding  two  –ve operands n Overflow  if  result  sign  is  0 

---

Chapter  3  —Arithmetic  for  Computers  — 40 

### Integer  Subtraction 

- Add  negation  of  second  operand 

- Example:  7  – 6  =  7  +  (–6)     +7: 0000  0000  ...  0000  0111 

- 6: 1111  1111  ...  1111  1010 +1: 0000  0000  ...  0000  0001 

- Overflow  if  result  out  of  range 

- Subtracting  two  +ve  or  two  –ve  operands,  no     overflow 

- Subtracting  +ve  from  –ve  operand 

- Overflow  if  result  sign  is  0 

- Subtracting  –ve  from  +ve  operand 

- Overflow  if  result  sign  is  1 

